README.md, before:

# serial2mqtt
For a complete view : [with UML sequence diagrams](https://vortex314.github.io/serial2mqtt.html)
Arduino Sample program to communicate with the serial2mqtt  gateway , see : [Arduino device code](https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial)

Most simple example : publish uptime to MQTT via serial line. 
```
#include  <Arduino.h>
void  setup() {
Serial.begin(115200);
}
void  loop() {
Serial.println("[1,\"src/myTopic/time\","+String(millis())+"]");
delay(100);
}
```

MQTT for all micro-controllers ! The purpose is to offer MQTT publisher/subscriber functionality to all small micro controllers. Those with just a UART or USB interface.
Example : some cheap STM32 board on eBay. 

<img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/stellaris.jpeg" width="200" title="Stellaris Launchpad 5$"><img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/maple.jpg" width="200" title="Maple mini 4$"><img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/esp32.jpg" width="200" title="ESP32 6$"><img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/bluepill.jpg" width="200" title="STM32F103C8T6 2$">
I know the ESP32 is capable of Wifi and MQTT on TCP/IP , but in my case it was used for its PWM capabilities and enclosed in a metal box. 

This program will act as a full MQTT Client gateway and make integration as simple as possible.
This was created because Ethernet or WiFi is still absent in most ( cheap ) controllers .
Also the concept behind is that a central PC or Raspberry PI can act as the intelligent mind behind commodity components.

![enter image description here](http://drive.google.com/uc?export=view&id=1rGeHOaMEGLJJqxFsd5fnaAE7N1DHoJUI)



   ## Working assumptions and features
- Topic Names 
--The design will take into account some assumptions about topic names and tree-structure to make it simple to use.
Structure topic to and from  device :
-- dst/DEVICE/SERVICE/PROPERTY
-- src/DEVICE/SERVICE/PROPERTY
-- if DEVICE is not known yet the serial2mqtt will subscribe to the dst/HOST.PORT/serial2mqtt/# , where PORT is for example ttyUSB0
- Serial messages will be  **JSON** array or object

-- JSON will be text delimited by newlines
- Through the same communication, debugging logs can be handled without disturbing the mqtt flow. Any line that doesn't start with '{' or be a valid JSON is considered log.
- the serial2mqtt establishes the client MQTT link and subscribes to dst/DEVICE/# when DEVICE is known. 
- when there is a big delay on the serial2mqtt serial input, it will do a serial disconnect and connect attempt , to unlock USB ports
- serial2mqtt is event driven and as much as possible unblocking using MQTT in Async mode
- one instance of serial2mqtt should be able to handle different serial ports
- USB devices coming and going should be tracked by serial2mqtt
- Configuration can be command line and config file driven ( JSON ). command line overrides config settings. 


## Optional 
The serial2mqtt should be able to reset the device ( hard reset )
- The serial2mqtt should be able to program new code into the device
- serial2mqtt should be able to program the device through the serial interface, for this purpose a third party app will be launched with the concerned serial port as argument.

# Protocol
## JSON TEXT
### JSON ARRAY
Example : [1,"mytopic","3.141592653"]
```
[<COMMAND>,<TOPIC>,<MESSAGE>,<QOS>,<RETAIN>,<CRC>] 
* QOS ,RETAIN, CRC  retain are optional
<CRC> : can be checked or not, is calculated on the total JSON string based on the message containing "0000" as temporary CRC. When calculated is in HEX format.
* COMMAND 0:SUBSCRIBE,1:PUBLISH,2:MQTT-CONN,3:MQTT-DISC
* publish : [1,"dst/topic1","message1",0,0]
* subscribe : [0,"dst/myTopic/#"]
* QOS : 0,1,2 : for QOS, default 0
* RETAIN : 0 or 1 for true or false, default 0
```
- Example publish : [1,"myTopicPi","3.141592653"]
- Example subscribe : [0,"myTopics/#"]
### JSON OBJECT
```
    Example : { "cmd":"MQTT-PUB","topic":"src/device/service/property","message":"1234.66","qos":0,"retained":false }\n
```
TEXT JSON

    { "cmd":"MQTT-PUB","topic":"src/device/service/property","message":"1234.66","qos":0,"retained":false }\n


 ## CONNECTION SETUP
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant µC
participant serial2mqtt
participant MQTT Broker

activate serial2mqtt
serial2mqtt-->>µC: open serial port tty
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: connect(broker,port)
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [1,"SOMETHING","SOMETHING",0,1]   replaying saved local persistence messages even before the MQTT connection establishment
MQTT Broker -->> serial2mqtt: connAck
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [2,"DEVICE",""]
µC->> serial2mqtt: [0,"dst/DEVICE/+"]
µC->> serial2mqtt : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
deactivate serial2mqtt

activate serial2mqtt
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: subscribe("dst/DEVICE/#")
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
MQTT Broker-->>serial2mqtt: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
serial2mqtt-->>µC : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
deactivate serial2mqtt

activate serial2mqtt
µC->> serial2mqtt : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
MQTT Broker-->>serial2mqtt: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
serial2mqtt-->>µC : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
deactivate serial2mqtt

Note right of µC: no more messages after 5 sec, 
Note right of µC: serial2mqtt disconnects serial port and tries to reconnect. MQTT connection always open.
serial2mqtt-->>µC: close serial port tty
serial2mqtt-->>µC: open serial port

Note right of µC: when serial2mqtt gets diconnected from the MQTT broker:
MQTT Broker-->>serial2mqtt: disconnects
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [3,"",""]
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: connect(broker,port)
MQTT Broker -->> serial2mqtt: connAck
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [2,"DEVICE",""]
```
# Programming through serial2mqtt
A command line utility will send a single mqtt request to the serial2mqtt gateway to program the microcontroller.
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant µC
participant serial2mqtt
participant MQTT Broker
participant programmer CLI
programmer CLI -x MQTT Broker: PUBLISH("dst/drive/serial2mqtt/flash",flash image binary)
MQTT Broker ->> serial2mqtt : PUBLISH
activate serial2mqtt
serial2mqtt ->> µC : program flash image
serial2mqtt ->> MQTT Broker : PUBLISH(logs)
MQTT Broker ->> programmer CLI : logs
µC ->> serial2mqtt : startup logs
serial2mqtt ->> MQTT Broker : logs
MQTT Broker ->> programmer CLI : logs
µC ->> serial2mqtt : MQTT Pub
deactivate serial2mqtt
```
# Logging through serial2mqtt
Everything that serial2mqtt receives on the serial port is also send on a topic.The micrcontroller will also log to the central logging system 
# Build instructions
- install libssl-dev ( apt-get  install libssl-dev )
- git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/vortex314/serial2mqtt.git
- cd serial2mqtt
- cd paho.mqtt.c &&  cmake -DPAHO_BUILD_STATIC=true && make && cd ..
- in serial2mqtt folder : mkdir build && cd build && cmake .. && make

    
There's an [experimental OpenWrt package](https://github.com/halfbakery/serial2mqtt-openwrt),
you can build az ipk package from the git head tailored to your system in
less than 5 minutes.


# Configuration
See [Configuring serial2mqtt](doc/CONFIGURATION.md) for details.
    

# Tested
 - ESP32 NodeMCU
# Still to do
 - logging mechanism - DONE 
 - disconnect serial and retry to avoid locking USB ports after timeouts - DONE
 - write binary image to file and send to microcontroller by activating configured external command , example esptool or stm32flash
 - implement binary ? why should I ? 
 - command line tool to flash and monitor logs.  
 -- s2m -f file.bin -m test.mosquitto.org -t pi1-USB0
 -- s2m -f file.bin -m test.mosquitto.org -t steer.USB0
 - Both lines have the same destination, logical and physical destination , if steer device is connected to pi1 host.
 - add other MQTT config params in config file : user, password, clientId - DONE
 - test with Maple Mini
 -   add static topic through config : "src/DEVICE/serial2mqtt/board" "ESP32-Nodemcu" , which will be published every 5 seconds
 - add "MQTT-SUB" command to give micro-controller control over topic subscription.
 - add log level as parameter -l ( T,D,I,W,E ) for TRACE,DEBUG,INFO,WARN,ERROR level
# Code design
Per serial port there is a main thread and mqtt threads for callback
The main thread waits for events and handle these primarily. 2 timers in this thread are checked for expiry ( not time critical ) : serial-watchdog and mqtt-connect.

To avoid concurrency issues , the callbacks of the mqtt threads are communicated back by writing an event code on a pipe. 
The main threads waits on events : timeout of 1 sec, data on serial file-descriptor or pipe file-descriptor. 
The mqtt event of received message is handled directly by writing the message on the serial port.
# Update 30 Dec 2020 : added colorcoding log of protocol and Arduino debug output.
```
    "log" : {
        "protocol":true,
        "debug":true,
        "useColors":true
    }
```
As it it is difficult to debug your implementation of the prorocol on the Arduino, hereby a view what is on the serial line.
![Alt text](doc/colorLogs.png?raw=true "Title")

## conan package manager
The project uses conan package manager to install dependencies.
To install conan on Ubuntu 20.04 :
```
sudo apt-get install python3-pip
pip3 install conan
conan profile detect
```
To install dependencies :
```
conan install .
```
To build :
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```
To run :
```
./serial2mqtt
```
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTUzNjc2MDc0XX0=
-->

Commit message:

CMakeLists.txt: Added import of OpenSSL as it is required by the secured version specified with the 's' in (eclipse-paho-mqtt-c::paho-mqtt3a)s(-static) README.md: added a build option to build paho-mqtt-c library in secure mode

README.md, after:

# serial2mqtt
For a complete view : [with UML sequence diagrams](https://vortex314.github.io/serial2mqtt.html)
Arduino Sample program to communicate with the serial2mqtt  gateway , see : [Arduino device code](https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial)

Most simple example : publish uptime to MQTT via serial line. 
```
#include  <Arduino.h>
void  setup() {
Serial.begin(115200);
}
void  loop() {
Serial.println("[1,\"src/myTopic/time\","+String(millis())+"]");
delay(100);
}
```

MQTT for all micro-controllers ! The purpose is to offer MQTT publisher/subscriber functionality to all small micro controllers. Those with just a UART or USB interface.
Example : some cheap STM32 board on eBay. 

<img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/stellaris.jpeg" width="200" title="Stellaris Launchpad 5$"><img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/maple.jpg" width="200" title="Maple mini 4$"><img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/esp32.jpg" width="200" title="ESP32 6$"><img src="https://github.com/vortex314/mqtt2serial/raw/master/doc/bluepill.jpg" width="200" title="STM32F103C8T6 2$">
I know the ESP32 is capable of Wifi and MQTT on TCP/IP , but in my case it was used for its PWM capabilities and enclosed in a metal box. 

This program will act as a full MQTT Client gateway and make integration as simple as possible.
This was created because Ethernet or WiFi is still absent in most ( cheap ) controllers .
Also the concept behind is that a central PC or Raspberry PI can act as the intelligent mind behind commodity components.

![enter image description here](http://drive.google.com/uc?export=view&id=1rGeHOaMEGLJJqxFsd5fnaAE7N1DHoJUI)



   ## Working assumptions and features
- Topic Names 
--The design will take into account some assumptions about topic names and tree-structure to make it simple to use.
Structure topic to and from  device :
-- dst/DEVICE/SERVICE/PROPERTY
-- src/DEVICE/SERVICE/PROPERTY
-- if DEVICE is not known yet the serial2mqtt will subscribe to the dst/HOST.PORT/serial2mqtt/# , where PORT is for example ttyUSB0
- Serial messages will be  **JSON** array or object

-- JSON will be text delimited by newlines
- Through the same communication, debugging logs can be handled without disturbing the mqtt flow. Any line that doesn't start with '{' or be a valid JSON is considered log.
- the serial2mqtt establishes the client MQTT link and subscribes to dst/DEVICE/# when DEVICE is known. 
- when there is a big delay on the serial2mqtt serial input, it will do a serial disconnect and connect attempt , to unlock USB ports
- serial2mqtt is event driven and as much as possible unblocking using MQTT in Async mode
- one instance of serial2mqtt should be able to handle different serial ports
- USB devices coming and going should be tracked by serial2mqtt
- Configuration can be command line and config file driven ( JSON ). command line overrides config settings. 


## Optional 
The serial2mqtt should be able to reset the device ( hard reset )
- The serial2mqtt should be able to program new code into the device
- serial2mqtt should be able to program the device through the serial interface, for this purpose a third party app will be launched with the concerned serial port as argument.

# Protocol
## JSON TEXT
### JSON ARRAY
Example : [1,"mytopic","3.141592653"]
```
[<COMMAND>,<TOPIC>,<MESSAGE>,<QOS>,<RETAIN>,<CRC>] 
* QOS ,RETAIN, CRC  retain are optional
<CRC> : can be checked or not, is calculated on the total JSON string based on the message containing "0000" as temporary CRC. When calculated is in HEX format.
* COMMAND 0:SUBSCRIBE,1:PUBLISH,2:MQTT-CONN,3:MQTT-DISC
* publish : [1,"dst/topic1","message1",0,0]
* subscribe : [0,"dst/myTopic/#"]
* QOS : 0,1,2 : for QOS, default 0
* RETAIN : 0 or 1 for true or false, default 0
```
- Example publish : [1,"myTopicPi","3.141592653"]
- Example subscribe : [0,"myTopics/#"]
### JSON OBJECT
```
    Example : { "cmd":"MQTT-PUB","topic":"src/device/service/property","message":"1234.66","qos":0,"retained":false }\n
```
TEXT JSON

    { "cmd":"MQTT-PUB","topic":"src/device/service/property","message":"1234.66","qos":0,"retained":false }\n


 ## CONNECTION SETUP
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant µC
participant serial2mqtt
participant MQTT Broker

activate serial2mqtt
serial2mqtt-->>µC: open serial port tty
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: connect(broker,port)
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [1,"SOMETHING","SOMETHING",0,1]   replaying saved local persistence messages even before the MQTT connection establishment
MQTT Broker -->> serial2mqtt: connAck
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [2,"DEVICE",""]
µC->> serial2mqtt: [0,"dst/DEVICE/+"]
µC->> serial2mqtt : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
deactivate serial2mqtt

activate serial2mqtt
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: subscribe("dst/DEVICE/#")
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
MQTT Broker-->>serial2mqtt: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
serial2mqtt-->>µC : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
deactivate serial2mqtt

activate serial2mqtt
µC->> serial2mqtt : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
MQTT Broker-->>serial2mqtt: publish("dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true")
serial2mqtt-->>µC : [1,"dst/DEVICE/system/loopback","true"]
deactivate serial2mqtt

Note right of µC: no more messages after 5 sec, 
Note right of µC: serial2mqtt disconnects serial port and tries to reconnect. MQTT connection always open.
serial2mqtt-->>µC: close serial port tty
serial2mqtt-->>µC: open serial port

Note right of µC: when serial2mqtt gets diconnected from the MQTT broker:
MQTT Broker-->>serial2mqtt: disconnects
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [3,"",""]
serial2mqtt-->>MQTT Broker: connect(broker,port)
MQTT Broker -->> serial2mqtt: connAck
serial2mqtt-->>µC: [2,"DEVICE",""]
```
# Programming through serial2mqtt
A command line utility will send a single mqtt request to the serial2mqtt gateway to program the microcontroller.
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant µC
participant serial2mqtt
participant MQTT Broker
participant programmer CLI
programmer CLI -x MQTT Broker: PUBLISH("dst/drive/serial2mqtt/flash",flash image binary)
MQTT Broker ->> serial2mqtt : PUBLISH
activate serial2mqtt
serial2mqtt ->> µC : program flash image
serial2mqtt ->> MQTT Broker : PUBLISH(logs)
MQTT Broker ->> programmer CLI : logs
µC ->> serial2mqtt : startup logs
serial2mqtt ->> MQTT Broker : logs
MQTT Broker ->> programmer CLI : logs
µC ->> serial2mqtt : MQTT Pub
deactivate serial2mqtt
```
# Logging through serial2mqtt
Everything that serial2mqtt receives on the serial port is also send on a topic. The micrcontroller will also log to the central logging system 
# Build instructions
- `serial2mqtt` is leveraging `paho-mqtt-c` library in secure mode, therefore it requires OpenSSL. Install libssl-dev: `apt-get  install libssl-dev`
- clone repository and submodules: `git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/vortex314/serial2mqtt.git`
- `cd serial2mqtt`
- `cd paho.mqtt.c && cmake -DPAHO_BUILD_STATIC=true -DPAHO_WITH_SSL=true && make && cd ..`
- back in serial2mqtt folder: `mkdir build && cd build && cmake .. && make`
    
There's an [experimental OpenWrt package](https://github.com/halfbakery/serial2mqtt-openwrt),
you can build az ipk package from the git head tailored to your system in
less than 5 minutes.


# Configuration
See [Configuring serial2mqtt](doc/CONFIGURATION.md) for details.
    

# Tested
 - ESP32 NodeMCU
# Still to do
 - logging mechanism - DONE 
 - disconnect serial and retry to avoid locking USB ports after timeouts - DONE
 - write binary image to file and send to microcontroller by activating configured external command , example esptool or stm32flash
 - implement binary ? why should I ? 
 - command line tool to flash and monitor logs.  
 -- s2m -f file.bin -m test.mosquitto.org -t pi1-USB0
 -- s2m -f file.bin -m test.mosquitto.org -t steer.USB0
 - Both lines have the same destination, logical and physical destination , if steer device is connected to pi1 host.
 - add other MQTT config params in config file : user, password, clientId - DONE
 - test with Maple Mini
 -   add static topic through config : "src/DEVICE/serial2mqtt/board" "ESP32-Nodemcu" , which will be published every 5 seconds
 - add "MQTT-SUB" command to give micro-controller control over topic subscription.
 - add log level as parameter -l ( T,D,I,W,E ) for TRACE,DEBUG,INFO,WARN,ERROR level
# Code design
Per serial port there is a main thread and mqtt threads for callback
The main thread waits for events and handle these primarily. 2 timers in this thread are checked for expiry ( not time critical ) : serial-watchdog and mqtt-connect.

To avoid concurrency issues , the callbacks of the mqtt threads are communicated back by writing an event code on a pipe. 
The main threads waits on events : timeout of 1 sec, data on serial file-descriptor or pipe file-descriptor. 
The mqtt event of received message is handled directly by writing the message on the serial port.
# Update 30 Dec 2020 : added colorcoding log of protocol and Arduino debug output.
```
    "log" : {
        "protocol":true,
        "debug":true,
        "useColors":true
    }
```
As it it is difficult to debug your implementation of the prorocol on the Arduino, hereby a view what is on the serial line.
![Alt text](doc/colorLogs.png?raw=true "Title")

## conan package manager
The project uses conan package manager to install dependencies.
To install conan on Ubuntu 20.04 :
```
sudo apt-get install python3-pip
pip3 install conan
conan profile detect
```
To install dependencies :
```
conan install .
```
To build :
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```
To run :
```
./serial2mqtt
```
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTUzNjc2MDc0XX0=
-->
